# How to deal with unresponsive SME? 6 simple yet powerful ways to make people share their knowledge with you

**According to the Cambridge Dictionary, being unresponsive means not reacting or answering, or not reacting or answering satisfactorily. Unresponsiveness is definitely one of the most painful elements that hinders the effective and meaningful dialogue between people, departments or organizations. So how to deal at work with a subject matter expert (SME) that is rather unresponsive? Thankfully there are some ways that can melt the most icy, unresponsive heart of (probably) any SME.**

A subject matter expert (SME) is an individual who has a deep understanding and expertise in a specific area. SMEs are recognized for their comprehensive knowledge, skills, and experience in a particular subject. They are definitely precious colleagues and mentors at work. SMEs play a crucial role in various areas, including business, education, technology, science, and more. They may be professionals, researchers, practitioners, or academics who have dedicated a significant amount of time and effort to mastering their chosen area.

SMEs are instrumental in transferring knowledge within their organizations and may also serve as trainers or mentors to help others (e.g. technical writers) develop expertise in the same domain. What if a given SME is difficult to cooperate with?

## Introduce yourself and give some context of your activity in a company

Let’s say, there's an SME, who–from your perspective– is not very eager to answer your questions. Why is it so? Obviously, this person can be simply busy at work and even with the most genuine approach is simply not able to find time for you very soon. They can be sick, having a hard time or simply forget about your request from the past. But these things don’t last ad infinitum and most people after a period of absence or unavailability go back to their work and find time also for answering questions to other coworkers. But this is theory and real-life scenarios can be completely different. Why do some SMEs keep not answering your questions even if you regularly ping them on Slack or by mail?

It’s worth remembering that there are experts, whose reasons to be unresponsive can be whole different than just aiming to make your life harder than it is. The SME can be unresponsive because they don’t understand your role and why you’re actually asking them your questions. So before going to the point and shooting with your questions, take time to tell the SME who you are and why you are trying to get info from them. Explain why it is important for your assignment and the company and what’s the place and meaning of your assignment in the grand scheme of things. From the point of view of an SME it's way more sensible (and interesting!) to give information to someone they (at least: more or less) know and have an idea of the place of this person in the entire organization. If you just write “Hey, answer my questions listed below, cheers!”, then don’t expect that any SME will be motivated enough to actually find time for you.

## Do your homework and don’t waste someone’s time

The second step that can’t be forgotten in order to handle an unresponsive SME is to take your time to get acquainted with their field of expertise as much as possible. Obviously no one tells you to take a whole course on a very hermetic topic in order to impress your interlocutor, but having a decent base of knowledge in order to ask meaningful questions is an ideal scenario. Let’s be honest: no one would want to ask a question to SME that would indicate you’re a total ignorant. On the other hand, your SME, who normally was not so responsive, may appreciate your effort in understanding the broad sense of their field and will be way more open to talk to you. Maybe it can also be a starting point of creating a nice relationship at work?

## Means of communication. Stay flexible

Based on your interpersonal skills you should discover what type of communication your SME prefers. Some of them are great at passing the knowledge during a friendly face-to face conversation, other ones prefer to answer the questions in a written form or during a phone call, etc. Be flexible and adjust yourself to your SME–the more comfortable they feel, the more (and better) information you’re likely to receive. The hard truth is that such an interview is about them and not you. You’re heavily responsible for the final outcome of such an exchange of knowledge and you should be ready to work also in conditions that are not fully comfortable for you but which can help open up your interlocutor.

## Ask questions that can give you interesting and meaningful answers

Talking about questions, there’s a rule that you should always remember about: if possible, ask more open questions (so called wh-questions) to those, on which your SME can answer only yes or no. Asking questions in a proper way is the method to encourage people to share their precious knowledge with you. You can know a lot about the field of expertise of your SME but sometimes without questions that are able to fish the most juicy information the results of your interview will be bland. On the other hand, it can be that your SME, once not very unresponsive, but being forced to sit with you and answer your questions, will be answering not only your questions but also talking about lots of things that may not be fully relevant for your case. Take into account that it may be like this, but doesn’t have to be–be diligent enough to note or record everything they say. If you don’t use it in your final material, it’s a great chance to learn new things. And obviously, time for estimation of the gathered material will come later, when you will be with your notes on your own.

A bonus thing: don’t hesitate to ask the SME to clarify the mental shortcuts! Remember that your SME, not even being aware of it, can also deal with their curse of knowledge. It’s your responsibility to understand what they’re talking to you about in order to be able to later explain that to your readers. If SME doesn’t like it, then let it be–make sure you know the topic as much as it’s possible but ask for clarification, because this is the clou of your interview.

## Involve their manager and document all the communication with SME

Emails and messages sent to your coworkers are a type of documentation. It’s good to be aware of it and, when needed, be ready to have it handy. If your SME will not have time for you for an extremely long time, you can always ask for support from their manager. Or, which doesn’t hurt either, you can start everything by sending an email with a request for a meeting or a talk to the SME and their manager at the same time.

## Be kind but persistent and think in perspective

No matter what you do and where you are, the very base of interpersonal communication is to keep being polite to your interlocutor. Sounds cliche but it can be a truly difficult task for those who are not pleased to work with a given SME due to different reasons. At the same time being polite doesn’t mean to agree on everything SME proposes or let them disrespect you. Stay positive, stay assertive and remember: sooner or later kindness and emotional maturity always pays off. Always give people the benefit of the doubt and don’t assume that your SME is unresponsive because it is evil or dislikes you.
After all, dealing with an unresponsive SME can be not only a challenge to boost your creativity but also to train your interpersonal skills. These are priceless treasures no matter where you work.
